Aero-SecureNet : Transformer-Powered
Detection of Data Injection Attacks in
5G-Enabled Aerospace IoT Networks
Harshil L. Jetani∗, Pujan J. Mevawala†, Aparna Kumari‡, Sudeep Tanwar§
∗†§Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Institute of Technology, Nirma University, Gujarat, India,
‡Computer Science and Engineering(AI-ML)
Email:∗23bce515@nirmauni.ac.in,†23bce531@nirmauni.ac.in,‡aparna.kumari@nirmauni.ac.in.
§sudeep.tanwar@nirmauni.ac.in
Abstract —Aerospace communication systems through
which critical information is shared between the aircraft
and control centers have been perceived as guaranteeing
the safe and efficient performance of the flights. In fact,
security of aerospace communication systems remains
exposed to cyber threats, including SQL injection attacks,
that may compromise the integrity of the data and, in the
worst scenario, affect the communication of aircraft. This
paper illustrates a deep learning-based framework that
detects whether aerospace communication is attacked or
under normal condition and then classifies. The currently
applied deep learning models are RNN, LSTM and
Transformers. Optimization was carried out using the
following optimizers, Adam, AdamW and Nadam. This
method has been adopted in the analysis of network traf-
fic based on SQL injection attacks. Among the models,
it was noticed that the Transformer performed better
in the aspect of capturing contextual dependencies and
processing sequential information. The proposed system
detects communication vulnerabilities in preventing the
spread of erroneous data between stations and aircraft. It
demonstrates accuracy of 98.99% as well as ROC curve
analysis, the Transformer model is superior to RNN and
LSTM models.
Index Terms —SQL injection attack, IoT to basestation,
Flight data controller, Deep Learning, Artificial Intelli-
gence
I. I NTRODUCTION
The Flight communication and data recording sys-
tems have become very important day by day in
the aerospace industry which has revolutionized in-
novations in the flight. Prior, decision making was
purely manual. But in crucial situations as emergency,
abortion, compulsion this is not more useful. In such
important areas such as disasters response and military
combat they have a very crucial role in ensuring of
secure movement, efficient emergency response and
heightened communication by relaying crucial flight
information to the appropriate quarters. All these sys-
tems are availing timely information and are helping to
enable better operational result by reducing possibility
of occurrence of accidents.
In the area of communication technology, the pro-
ductivity in aerospace is gotten through new and bettersolutions. Currently, new technologies such as the IoT
and AI are being used to address the needs to track and
manage resources in aviation systems in real time. New
aircraft systems utilize intelligent algorithms for traffic
analysis, latency expectations for decision making.
However, there are problems like bandwidth alloca-
tion and control which affect some important supplies
like communication, GPS equipment, industrial flight
instruments and other essential items.
The communication and flight data recorders are
essential equipment of an aircraft including other sys-
tems that are vital sources of information that would
be required in analysis, mobilization of resources as
well as timely decision making. Such systems include
equipment available for collecting high-fidelity data
streams in fixed intervals for operative functionality
within multiple environments. For example, SQL in-
jection remains one of the biggest threats to flight
operations safety. This type of cyber threat happens
when an attacker introduces wrong data inputs to the
queries of the database enabling them to adjust or even
steal confidential information.
By releasing the potential of aerospace industry
and the need for securing it from attacks like SQL
injection. A well known researcher Maha et al. have
tried the various ML techniques like ANN, CNN,
decision tree, naive Bayes, SVM, random forest and
logistic regression, the experimental results showed
that the proposed approach achieved an accuracy of
94% and an F1-score of 92% [1]. Moreover to detect
and preventing from the attack ketema et al. had used
the CNN model and able to get the accuracy around
the 97%[2]. Falor et al. applied Bayes Net followed
by Kibana who achieved 95.4% accuracy for detection
of SQL injection[3].
A well known researcher John Irungu et al. had
used three main classifiers indicate a model predic-
tion accuracy of 98.3605% with SVM, 96.296% with
KNN and 97.530% with Random Forest [4]. With the
aim of detection of SQL injection attack a researcher
senouci et al. carried out experiments which shown
considerable increase in accuracy, 96.65% with the
GRU [5]. A well known researcher Wei Zhang et al.
using deep neural network achieved 96% accuracy [6].
Mohd Fadzli Marhusin et al. applied various machine
learning models and achieved 97.3% accuracy with
SVM outperforming other models[7] . Kwok Tai Chui
et al. achieved an outstanding accuracy of 99.6% by
employing a Stacked Random Forest model combined
with a Boosted Logistic Regression Meta-Learner,
demonstrating a remarkable performance[8].
A. Novelty
A devoted research work has come up with a
revolutionary framing of Aero-SecureNet , powered by
DL models and cybersecurity considerations to secure
aerospace communication systems from SQL injection
attacks with Transformers, RNN, LSTM. The opti-
mization is achieved by employing Adam, AdamW
and Nadam optimizers which indeed improved the
accuracy of the model and caused decline in false
positives. For the success of this framework, a series
of evaluation metrics including but not limited to
accuracy, but also precision, recall and F1-score are
used. This research brings about a change in aerospace
cybersecurity since it combines data security along
with real-time communication conditions to keep it
safe and operating without break.
B. Research Contributions
•We proposed Aero-SecureNet , a DL-based frame-
work utilizing Transformers to detect the SQL in-
jection attack which ensures reliable communica-
tion in life critical applications such as aerospace.
•A comparative analysis of DL models (RNN,
LSTM, Transformers) and optimizers (Adam,
AdamW and Nadam) was conducted which
demonstrated the best performance of the Trans-
formers in attack detection.
•Aero-SecureNet is validated using various eval-
uation metrics such as accuracy, loss, precision,
recall, F1-score and ROC curves.
C. Article Layout
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The
system model and problem formulation is elucidated
in section II. Aero-SecureNet architecture is shown
in section III. Results are shown in section IV. The
section V presents the conclusion and future work.
II. S YSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
This proposed solution addresses the vulnerability of
SQL injection attacks in today’s flight communication
and IoT systems. The aerospace critical defense, the
protection of flight data recorder and communication
system based on IoT communication is the threat of
such attacks which may lead to unauthorized access
or system failure. We classify network communication
Fig. 1: Aero-SecureNet Architecture.
into secure data channels and utilize deep learning
based classification models for optimization of intru-
sion detection that helps in detecting the malicious
SQL injection attack.
minimize
w,θL(w, θ) +λ· R(w)
subject to: P(C(q) =Attack |xq)≥δ,∀q∈QAttack
P(C(q) =Normal |xq)≥1−ϵ,∀q∈QNormal
where, the optimization problem minimizes the loss
function L(w, θ)with regularization R(w)to balance
model complexity and accuracy, while ensuring attack
classification confidence δand tolerating a misclassifi-
cation rate ϵfor normal queries. The objectives include
minimizing detection error J1and maximizing model
confidence J2,
The model we implemented allows us to take advan-
tage of deep learning techniques to accurately analyze
network interactions and predict the potential SQL
injection attack. It categorizes each query based on
input features.
III. T HEPROPOSED APPROACH
Aero-SecureNet (as shown in Fig. 1) consists of
three subsections: the data acquisition layer, the SQL
injection attack detection layer and the response and
adaptive migration layer. Each layer is described as
follows.
A. Data Acquisition Layer
The Data Acquisition Layer in aerospace IoT sys-
tems plays crucial role in the transmitting and col-
lecting data from IoT devices such as environmental
sensors, flight data recorders and communication ser-
vices onboard the aircraft sensors which will be useful
for collecting data and then detecting the SQL injec-
tion attack, including environmental conditions, service
port status and communication traffic. All the data is
collected by the base station which is responsible for
receiving and processing the data, performing feature
extraction, scaling and transmitting the processed data
for further analysis. Equation describes the flow of
data between the station and IoT device, where the
Algorithm 1 Transformer-based Anomaly Detection in
IoT Dataset
Require: Dataset D, features F, target T, model
parameters P, callbacks C
Ensure: Trained model, evaluation metrics and visu-
alizations
1:Start: Initialize the process by setting up the
environment and loading necessary libraries
2:Load dataset D, extract features X←D[F], target
y←D[T]
3:Encode target yusing LabelEncoder
4:Split dataset: Xtrain,Xtest,ytrain,ytest ←
train test split(X,y)
5:Normalize features with StandardScaler
6:Build Transformer model: Add encoder blocks
with multihead attention and output layer
7:Compile model with optimizer ( Adam ,Nadam , or
AdamW )
8:Train model using callbacks: EarlyStopping
andReduceLROnPlateau
9:Mitigate potential attacks:
•Validate incoming queries for anomalies.
•Dynamically adjust the frequency of commu-
nication between devices.
10:Evaluate model: Generate metrics (accuracy, pre-
cision, recall, F1 score) and visualize (Precision-
Recall curve, confusion matrix)
11:End: Save the trained model, evaluation metrics
and visualizations for further analysis
base station acts as the central entity that receives and
processes data from multiple sensors:
Dacq(t) =Ttransmit (Xfiltered(t),Tdynamics (dsensors,dbase))
Aero-SecureNet helps to detect SQL injection attacks
by monitoring and analysing the traffic between the
communication channel like IoT sensors and the base
station. After analysing the coherence of data packets
and communication protocols like ports, https, fre-
quency, checksum Aero-SecureNet ensures that the data
transmission remains secure and free from attacks like
SQL injection. The data transmission process between
the IoT sensors and the base station can be described
as follows:
Dsensor(t) =X
si∈STtransmit (Xfiltered(t, si))
Dbase(t) =X
bj∈BTreceive (Dsensor(t),Ssync)· Csecure
DSTB(t) =Tcombine
X
si∈SXfiltered(t, si),X
bj∈BDbase(t)

The equation represents the transmission process where
the filtered sensor data STB Xfiltered(t, si)is aggregated
intoDsensor(t)and transmitted to the base station. The
base station synchronizes and secures the data before
aggregating it for final analysis. The primary goal ofAero-SecureNet is to detect and categorize communica-
tion into attack and normal scenario. The DL model is
used to determine whether a communication is normal
or contains attack. The attack detection mechanism is
formulated as follows:
ˆYattack(t) =α0+nX
k=1αk·L⊖k
t+Tthreshold (Esync(t), λthreshold )
Esync(t) =C(t)−R(t−ˆL(t))
2
Here, Tthreshold ensures the absence of false detec-
tions, while λthreshold controls the sensitivity of attack
detection. The synchronization error Esync(t)is calcu-
lated to ensure that detection process remains accurate
and reliable.
In summary, this layer is responsible for real-time
data collection transmitted between the IoT sensors
onboard the aircraft and the base station. The data
parameters include communication traffic, packet count
and byte count, all of which are useful in detecting the
SQL injection attacks in the system.
B. SQL injection Detection Layer
The dataset contains numerous features, from which
important ones are extracted through feature engi-
neering. These features help determine whether the
communication link is under an SQL injection attack
or not. There are two target labels: Normal and Attack.
The dataset used for training and evaluation, consists
of samples collected from the communication between
IoT devices and the base station. Each scenario is
symbolically represented as S = [Normal, Attack]
Initially, we experimented with various deep learning
models such as Transformers, RNN and LSTM using
optimizers such as Adam, Adamw, Nadam. After pro-
cessing through the first layer, the output is passed to
a multi-head attention layer with four heads, each of
size 64. In Transfomers, the input is processed after
applying layer normalization.
h(l)
j=z(l)
j−µ(l)
√
σ2(l)+ϵ·γ(l)+β(l),
where µ(l)=1
ddX
j=1z(l)
j, σ2(l)=1
ddX
j=1
z(l)
j−µ(l)2
Xeng(t) =Feng(Xraw(t),Wfeat,bfeat)+Ttrans(Xscaled(t))
By doing this training and normalization we detect
the attack in communication.
Yatk(t) =fdet(Xcomm(t), θdet)· Dtrans(Xcomm(t),db)
Xfiltered(t) =Fsanitize (Xraw(t),Wfilter,bfilter)
Xsecure(t) =ftransform (Xfiltered(t), θsecure)
Among all the models described above, the Trans-
former model emerged as the best choice for classify-
ing attacks. The Transformer model enables processing
of sequential and complex data, which is crucial for
applications such as flight communication, where the
accuracy is a necessity. These deep learning algo-
rithms support features that dynamically detect attacks
throughout edge-to-fog data transmission. Transform-
ers enables learning not only from textual data but
also captures temporal data patterns, such as abnormal
changes in the data transmission over time.
Ldetect=TX
t=1 
Lattack(Ypred(t),Ytrue(t)) +λ∥Wall(t)∥2
RNNs are well-suited for recognizing changing pat-
terns during attack detection. The LSTM layer has
ability to remember long-term dependencies which
addresses the vanishing gradient problem, while han-
dling sequential data. However, Transformers provides
the aggregation of performance with prevention of
model overfitting. We employed regularization tech-
niques such as dropout layers (rate - 0.5) and batch
normalization was applied after each recurrent layer.
The output layer used softmax activation function,
which provides the probability distribution for two
binary classes. Binary cross-entropy loss is used to
evaluate models during training. The loss derivative
for the scaled sigmoid is expressed as:
∂sm(α·z)i
∂zj= sm( α·z)i·(δij−sm(α·z)j)
where, sm represents the softmax function and gra-
dient of binary cross entropy loss is derived as follows:
∂LBCE
∂W=1
NNX
i=1(pi−yi)zi+ 2λW
where zirepresents the input to the sigmoid func-
tion, piis the predicted probability and yiis the true
label. The term 2λWrepresents the regularization
factor applied to the weights and biases.
The output layer contains two neurons representing:
Normal and Attack. For training the Transformers, the
AdamW optimizer is selected because it is incorporated
with weight decay, which prevents overfitting on the
training data. Another approach to prevent overfitting
is early stopping, which was discussed earlier. It au-
tomatically adjusts the learning rate during training,
boosting the quantitative results. The decision-making
process is mathematically represented by the following
equation: gt=∇Lt
L(˜ϕt) =TX
t=1C(ht, yt)
ϕt+1=ϕt−α·ˆmt√ˆvt+ϵ+γ·ϕt
ϕg,t+1=ϕg,t−α·ˆmg,tp
ˆvg,t+ϵ+γ·ϕg,t
The final layer is well-suited for applications such as
SQL injection detection in aerospace IoT systems andbase stations, where objective is detection efficiency.
The model accurately classifies the normal and SQL
injection attacks. At the same time, the primary advan-
tage of using the Transformers architecture lies in its
ability to handle complex sequential and timestamped
data.
C. Response and Adaptive Mitigation Layer
This layer ensures that response, corrective action
and feedback loop to strengthen the system to address
the SQL injection attacks. The primary objective is
to guarantee that the detection result d∈Dleads to
proper execution of automated countermeasure c∈C
(for instance, query filtering, input validation, or SQL
query blocking) and the latter has been subject to
routing based on resource allocation r∈R. This
integration ensures that tasks can be easily migrated
during an attack and thereby, increasing the system’s
efficiency. Additionally, the receipt of feedback fb∈
FBenables learning-based model updates in this layer
and improves deep learning models for SQL injection
detection.
R(t) =X
d∈D(β· C(d) +γ· A(c) +δ· F(fb))
This layer guarantees that communication is never
interrupted in case of SQL injection attack. It prevents
SQL Injection by blocking SQL queries, validating
input or filtering queries. Resources are dynamically
allocated by the system to adapt to attack conditions
in order to provide uninterrupted data flow and system
functionality.
IV. R ESULT ANALYSIS
This section demonstrates the Aero-SecureNet ’s per-
formance analysis using various evaluation metrics
parameters, such as accuracy, loss, precision, recall and
F1 score.
A. Experimental Setup and Tools
The experimental setup uses a server with two T4
GPUs, 12 GB of RAM and 108 GB of hard disk space
and an x86-64 architecture. For faster data calcula-
tions and encapsulation of numerical functions we use
numpy with PyTorch framework. Additionally, various
libraries like datasets-2.18.0, dill-0.3.8, gitdb-4.0.11,
docker-py creds-0.4.0, GitPython-3.1.42, multiprocess-
0.70.16 were utilized.
B. Dataset Identification and Description
In this study, we utilize two benchmark datasets:
Data Injection Attack Dataset for Internet of Things[9].
The dataset contains the 15500 rows and 31 columns,
features like service ,http_user_agent ,
http_request_body_len ,dst_ip_bytes ,
conn_state and many others. We perform the EDA
on dataset and selected the top 10 important features
for implementation. The datasets are preprocessed
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Fig. 2: (a) Comparison of Validation Accuracy with Adam, Nadam and AdamW Optimisers with 3D plot (b)
Confusion matrix for Transfomers (c) ROC Curve comparision with RNN, LSTM, Transfomers
carefully in order to be compatible with deep learning
models. Preprocessing strategies such as handling
missing values, scaling, categorical feature encoding,
normalization and handling outliers, are systematically
applied. This approach provides a reliable performance
in detecting attacks in IoT communication.
C. Accuracy Comparison
The 3D graph for validation accuracy in Fig. 2(a)
provides comprehensive comparison of model perfor-
mance across various optimizers, showcasing the ef-
fectiveness of LSTM, RNN and Transformers models.
The AdamW optimizer gives highest accuracy with
Transformers, reaching 98.99%, followed by Adam
and Nadam optimizers, achieving accuracies of 98.86%
and 96.72.86% respectively. This highlights the ro-
bustness of the Transformers architecture when paired
with optimizers like AdamW. The LSTM model fol-
lowing Transformers , also demonstrates commendable
performance, particularly with the AdamW optimizer,
achieving an accuracy of 98.80%, followed by Adam,
Nadam which result in accuracies of 98.63% and
98.80% respectively.
This indicates LSTM’s ability to perform well with
slightly reduced performance compared to Transform-
ers. In contrast, the RNN model exhibits comparatively
lower performance, with its best validation accuracy
of 98.67% achieved using the AdamW optimizer, fol-
lowed by Nadam and Adam, which achieved accura-
cies of 98.80% and 98.67% respectively. These results
emphasize the superiority of the Transformer model in
achieving higher predictive accuracy across optimizers,
with AdamW and Adam proving to be particularly
effective. LSTM offers competitive performance, espe-
cially with AdamW and RNN model is less consistent,
highlighting its limitations in handling complex pat-
terns in data. The analysis underscores the importance
of selecting the optimal combination of architecture
and optimizer to maximize model performance for
specific applications.D. Accuracy and Loss Comparison of LSTM
As shown in Fig. 3(a), the Transformer model
achieved the highest validation accuracy of 98.99%
using the AdamW optimizer, followed by Adam and
Nadam at 98.86%, 96.72% respectively, which high-
lights AdamW optimizer as the best optimizer to
achieve high accuracy. In contrast, Fig.3(b) highlights
the validation loss trends, where Adam resulted in the
lowest loss, approximately 0.050, followed by Nadam
at around 0.036 and AdamW converging close to
0.044. The loss values demonstrate Nadam’s supe-
rior efficiency in minimizing error compared to other
optimizers. Collectively, this analysis underscores a
trade-off between optimizers, with AdamW excelling
in terms of accuracy and Nadam showing superior loss
minimization, which suggests that AdamW is optimal
for maximizing accuracy and Nadam’s ability to reduce
error.
E. Comparison of Performance Metrics of Transform-
ers
The 3D plot comparing precision, recall and F1-
score for the LSTM model across different optimizers,
as illustrated in Fig. 3(c), highlights the variations in
performance metrics. The Adam optimizer achieves
the highest scores, with precision at 0.9799, recall at
0.9701 and F1-score at 0.9750, demonstrating its supe-
rior ability to balance accuracy and stability. AdamW
follows with slightly lower values, showcasing its com-
petitive performance. Meanwhile, Nadam exhibit com-
paratively lower scores, indicating reduced efficiency
in certain metrics. Overall, the results emphasize the
effectiveness of Adam and AdamW in optimizing
the LSTM model’s precision, while Nadam provides
moderate performance.
F . ROC Curve Comparison and confusion matrix
Fig. 2(c) illustrates the ROC curves for RNN, Trans-
former and LSTM models with Adam optimizers,
highlighting the trade-off between true positive and
false positive rates. The Area Under the Curve (AUC)
values indicates the classification performance of each
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Fig. 3: (a) Accuracy and loss graphs for Transformers model (b) Loss for Transformers model (c) Comparison
of Validation metrics for LSTM, RNN, Transformers
model. For the RNN model, Adam optimizers achieved
perfect AUC value of 0.9998, while LSTM and Trans-
former both achieved AUC values of 0.9980 and
0.9988 respectively. The results highlights the superior
performance of the RNN model, especially with Adam
while LSTM and Transformer demonstrated consistent
performance across all optimizers.
A confusion matrix Fig. 2(b) shows the classifica-
tion outcomes of the models which includes four key
results: total true positives (1275 ”Attack” correctly
classified), total true negatives (1722 ”Natural” cor-
rectly classified), total false positives (72 ”Natural”
misclassified as ”Attack”), total false negatives (16
”Attack” misclassified as ”Natural”). The matrix helps
calculating important metrics like accuracy, precision,
recall and F1-score. For imbalanced datasets, it pro-
vides insights not only into the strengths of the model
but also potential areas for improvement.
V. C ONCLUSION
In conclusion, this paper explores a deep learn-
ing based model for securing IoT communication in
aerospace by detecting and preventing SQL data injec-
tion attacks. It provides the structure and framework
with transformer block with multi-head attention. It
guarantees reliable communication by reducing the loss
during training and validation while handling sequen-
tial and complex IoT data. Aero-SecureNet ’s ability to
adapt in real time to changing conditions with potential
enhancements using blockchain, demonstrates the ro-
bustness of the critical communication links that Aero-
SecureNet supports and its contribution to the security
and efficiency of a broad class of aerospace systems.
In the future, to enhance data security, quantum cryp-
tography, blockchain and its application in aerospace
will also be explored.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Alghawazi, D. Alghazzawi, and S. Alarifi, “Deep learning
architecture for detecting sql injection attacks based on rnn
autoencoder model,” Mathematics , vol. 11, no. 15, 2023.
[2] A. Ketema, Developing Sql Injection Prevention Model Using
Deep Learning Technique . PhD thesis, St. Mary’s University,
2022.[3] A. Falor, M. Hirani, H. Vedant, P. Mehta, and D. Krishnan, A
Deep Learning Approach for Detection of SQL Injection Attacks
Using Convolutional Neural Networks , pp. 293–304. 01 2022.
[4] J. Irungu, S. Graham, A. Girma, and T. Kacem, “Artificial
intelligence techniques for sql injection attack detection,” in
Proceedings of the 2023 8th International Conference on In-
telligent Information Technology , ICIIT ’23, (New York, NY ,
USA), p. 38–45, Association for Computing Machinery, 2023.
[5] O. Senouci and N. Benaouda, “Advanced deep learning frame-
work for detecting sql injection attacks based on gru model,”
STUDIES IN ENGINEERING AND EXACT SCIENCES , vol. 5,
p. e11299, Nov. 2024.
[6] W. Zhang, Y . Li, X. Li, M. Shao, Y . Mi, H. Zhang, and
G. Zhi, “Deep neural network-based sql injection detection
method,” Security and Communication Networks , vol. 2022,
no. 1, p. 4836289, 2022.
[7] M. A. M. Oudah and M. F. Marhusin, “Sql injection detection
using machine learning: A review,” Malaysian Journal of Sci-
ence Health Technology , vol. 10, pp. 39–49, Apr 2024.
[8] V . Vajrobol, G. J. Saxena, S. Singh, A. Pundir, B. B. Gupta,
A. Gaurav, and K. T. Chui, “Enhancing aviation control security
through ads-b injection detection using ensemble meta-learning
models with explainable ai,” Alexandria Engineering Journal ,
vol. 112, pp. 63–73, 2025.
[9] “https://ieee-dataport.org/documents/false-data-injection-attack-
dataset-industrial-internet-things,”